1.
For as much as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those
things which are most surely believed among us, even as they delivered them unto us, which
from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word, it seemed good to me also, having
had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order,
most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know the certainty of those things wherein
thou hast been instructed.
There was, in the days of Herod the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias of
the course of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless.
And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken
in years.
And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office before God in the order
of his course, according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to burn
incense when he went into the temple of the Lord.
And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.
And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar
of incense.
And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.
And thou shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth.
For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong
drink, and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost even from his mother's womb.
And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias to turn the hearts of the fathers
to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord.
And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this?
For I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God,
and am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings.
And behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak until the day that these things shall
be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.
And the people waited for Zacharias, and marveled that he tarried so long in the temple.
And when he came out, he could not speak unto them, and they perceived that he had seen
a vision in the temple, for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.
And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished,
he departed to his own house.
And after those days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying, Thus
hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach
among men.
And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee,
named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph of the house of
David, and the virgin's name was Mary.
And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord
is with thee, blessed art thou among women.
And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner
of salutation this should be.
And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favor with God.
And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his
name Jesus.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall
give unto him the throne of his father David.
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end.
Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee.
Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of
God.
And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age, and this
is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
For with God nothing shall be impossible.
And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.
And the angel departed from her.
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of
Judah, and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in
her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost.
And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed
is the fruit of thy womb, and whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come
to me?
For lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my
womb for joy.
And blessed is she that believed, for thou shalt be a performance of those things which
were told her from the Lord.
And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.
For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden.
For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
For he that is mighty hath done to me great things, and holy is his name.
And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.
He hath shewed strength with his arm.
He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.
He hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he hath sent empty away.
He hath holpen his servant Israel in remembrance of his mercy, as he spake to our fathers,
to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.
And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.
Now Elizabeth's full time came that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a son.
And her neighbors and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed great mercy upon her,
and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they
called him Zacharias after the name of his father.
And his mother answered and said, Not so, but he shall be called John.
And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name.
And they made signs to his father how he would have him called.
And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John.
And they marveled all.
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spake and praised
God.
And fear came on all that dwelt round about them, and all these sayings were noised abroad
throughout all the hill country of Judea.
And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child
shall this be?
And the hand of the Lord was with him.
And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his people, and hath raised up
an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David, as he spake by the mouth
of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began, that we should be saved from
our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, to perform the mercy promised to
our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath which he sware to our father Abraham,
that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the highest, for thou shalt go before the
face of the Lord to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of salvation unto his people by
the remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring
from on high hath visited us, to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his
showing unto Israel.
CHAPTER II
And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that
all the world should be taxed.
And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.
And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into Judea unto the city
of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David,
to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife being great with child.
And so it was, that while they were there the days were accomplished that she should
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over
their flock by night.
And lo!
the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them,
and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them, Fear not!
For behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people.
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.
And this shall be a sign unto you.
Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in a manger.
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.
And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds
said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come
to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us.
And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.
And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning
this child.
And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they
had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.
And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcision of the child, his name was
called Jesus, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they
brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord.
As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called
holy to the Lord.
And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, a pair
of turtle doves, or two young pigeons.
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon.
And the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel.
And the Holy Ghost was upon him.
And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before he had
seen the Lord's Christ.
And he came by the Spirit into the temple, and when the parents brought in the child
Jesus to do for him after the custom of the law, then took he him up in his arms and blessed
God and said,
And Joseph and his mother marveled at those things which were spoken of him.
And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for
the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.
Yea, a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also.
That the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aesir.
She was of a great age, and had lived with a husband seven years from her virginity.
And she was a widow of about four score and four years, which departed not from the temple
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.
And she, coming in that instant, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to
all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into
Galilee to their own city Nazareth.
And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was
upon him.
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast.
And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in
Jerusalem, and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.
But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's journey, and they sought
him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.
And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.
And it came to pass that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the
midst of the doctors, both hearing them and asking them questions.
And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
And when they saw him, they were amazed.
And his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us?
Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.
And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me?
Wisst ye not that I must be about my father's business?
And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them.
But his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.
End of chapters 1 and 2.